And this is freaking genius. I've taught
it to millions of people. It's curing
people's anxiety.
There is nobody like Mel Robbins. There
is nobody.
If I hadn't done what I did that
morning, my life would have gone in a
totally different direction. I'd
probably be divorced. I'd probably be an
alcoholic. My family would be torn
apart. No idea what I'd be doing for a
living or where I would be. I finally
had the experience
of being in my body and being safe and
being okay.
And I hadn't had that in a really long
time. Um, [snorts]
[music]
so you asked me in the beginning
kind of what is it that that created all
of this insight or this drive to figure
it out? And I think I just figured it
out. You You just [__] did it.
[music]
They call her the female Tony Robbins,
but she's so much more than that. She's
one of the most incredibly vulnerable,
honest, introspective,
wise people I have ever met in my entire
life. and she's written three
best-selling books that offer a very
simple solution to have a transformative
impact on your entire life. I first
found out about Mel Robbins some 7 years
ago when I watched a video of her
talking about how to motivate yourself
every single day. And when my team told
me that she was coming to London for a
short trip, I said, "We have to get her
on this podcast." There is nobody like
Mel Robbins. There is nobody. I've never
seen Mel Robbins cry during an interview
before, but in this podcast, it happens
again. We have an epiphany. Mel removes
her glasses, she begins to cry, and it's
an incredibly touching moment. I think
for a lot of you, this is going to be
the favorite podcast on this channel
that you've ever listened to. So,
without further ado, I'm Steven Bartlett
and this is the Diver CEO. I hope
nobody's listening, but if you are, then
please keep this to yourself. [music]
Before
we started recording, I said a lot of
nice things about you just a few seconds
ago and um I talked about how sort of
introspective you are, how much you've
achieved, your your remarkable ability
to speak about ideas and things you've
discovered in yourself. um you really
are a standout individual. And so
whenever I meet someone that I consider
to be a really standout individual, it
always begs the question to me having a
small background in like childhood
psychology, what is it? What was the
cauldron in which Mel was sculpted that
made you the person you are today at the
very start of your life?
I
I guess that I'm trying to think about
like there's no defining moment
because I had great parents who did the
best that they could with what they were
handed in terms of their own childhoods
and patterns and thinking. And uh I grew
up in a tiny little town where nothing
really happened. But one thing did
happen and that was in the fourth grade.
I was uh at a family kind of ski trip
thing and uh in the middle of the night
I woke up and one of the kids was on top
of me and yeah like on top of me
molesting me. We're going here like
fast. I mean, you asked like what was
the thing and this is like the first
thing that popped into mind
and um it was interesting because
I didn't remember the experience for a
very long time. I did not remember that
this had happened until I was in my late
20s. And if you look at the spectrum of
what can happen to somebody in terms of
sexual abuse, which unfortunately is
very common uh experience for people,
this was a very mild experience. Like it
wasn't anybody that I knew. It was a
one-off. It was another kid. So clearly
something was happening to this kid in
their life. It wasn't scary. It was
confusing. But I was awoken
from a state of sleep and I immediately
felt and knew that something was wrong.
And it's my first experience in my life
of what psychologists call
disassociating. I literally left my body
and I rolled over and I don't even
remember how it ended because I wasn't
in my body to be there. And the very
next morning, I'll never forget this.
Um, I hid underneath the sheets because
it was a big bunk room and all the kids
uh left to go downstairs to get ready to
go skiing. And I remember waiting until
I thought it was quiet. I threw the
comforter off. I went down these steep
stairs. I turned the corner and there
was my mom and she was cooking breakfast
with some of the other moms. And she
turned around and she said, "How'd you
sleep?"
And I immediately
Steven wanted to tell her.
And out of the corner of my eye, I saw
the kid.
And in that moment, split-second child
brain, I froze.
And as much as I wanted to tell my mom,
and I knew exactly what she'd do. I
mean, she grew up on a farm. She had a
spatula in her hand. She would have hit
that kid into next week. But I didn't
know what the kid was going to do. And
in that moment, I lied. And I said,
"Fine."
And the day went on and nothing
happened. And I believe whether it is a
30-year long struggle with anxiety
or a tendency to disassociate or the
fact that I was chronically lying when I
was younger in any moment when I felt
uncertain. I had no idea how that
singular moment set me on a course
that would last decades before I
realized that all of these patterns of
behavior that I was struggling with. I
didn't know why I lied. I didn't know
why I felt so uncomfortable if I
couldn't predict somebody's reaction. I
couldn't understand why I would leave my
body so many times. I couldn't
understand why I had very few memories
from my childhood. It wasn't until I
started to understand human behavior,
uh, the way the brain learns patterns,
the way that you need and can break
patterns and replace patterns and learn
new patterns, that I began this journey
that I've been on for the past 10 years
of understanding my own breakdowns, my
own heartaches, my own struggles, and
sharing what I'm learning with anybody
who will listen. How's that for an
answer? [laughter]
Yeah. Did you ever tell anybody? When
did you first tell someone about that
incident?
Well, I never told anybody because it's
like I forgot about it in that moment.
Like I just suppressed what had
happened. And there were lots of times
in my life when I was a teenager, when I
was in college, when I was in law
school, particularly in law school,
because my anxiety just came to a huge
crescendo in law school, just completely
out of control with my thoughts, with
how I felt in my body. I had not been
diagnosed yet with anxiety or anxiety
disorder and had not been medicated. Did
not even know anxiety was a thing. So
this would have been 1992
through 1994.
And um
I didn't even remember it. And so I
didn't even remember this incident until
I was 28 years old and I was sitting in
like kind of one of these life
improvement seminars where you're in a
windowless conference room and
everyone's got a name tag on and there's
a person up front and this woman stands
up and she was talking about how she had
been molested when she was younger by a
babysitter that her parents hired. And
the story went on how she had been in
therapy for a long time. She was
starting to deal with the trauma of the
experience. She had forgiven the
babysitter. She had forgiven her
parents, but she could not forgive her
sister. And the person leading the
seminar kind of looked at her and said,
"Why? What's wrong with your sister?"
And she said, "Well, I'm so angry that
this babysitter
was choosing me, and while I'm in this
room getting abused, my sister is out
there watching TV."
And
when she said that, I had an immediate
memory
and there was this triggering moment
where I
I was sitting in this window in this
conference room at the age of 28, but I
was physically in that bunk bed because
what I remembered in that moment was, oh
my god, when I woke up in the middle of
the night with this kid on top of me, I
looked to my right, my younger brother
was sleeping in the bed right there. And
my immediate thought was, I don't want
this person to hurt him. And that's why
I rolled over and stayed quiet. And so
it was that it was this woman telling
the story about her sister that
triggered me to remember it. And as soon
as I remembered it, oh my god, I told my
brother, I told my parents, I you know,
I just started talking about it. I I
think that one of my um one of the
things that I'm grateful for is that I
process things by talking about it. Once
the dam is open, baby, like the
floodgates are coming. Like I just and
and so I tend to process things by
speaking about it. And for me, it wasn't
the
um incident itself
that created a lot of grief for me
because I know based on the work that
I've done as a crisis intervention
counselor working uh with victims of
domestic violence, the work I did uh as
a criminal defense attorney working for
legal aid in New York City and the
amount of training that we got um and
also just the amount of uh work I've
done and studying that I've done on the
subject of psychology and human
behavior. I know that when a kid is
doing that to another kid, it's being
done to them. So I even at the age of
28, I didn't even have any anger toward
the person that did this to me. My anger
was at myself. Why didn't I remember
this? Why why am I so [__] up? Why
couldn't I have remembered this? like
the constant
self bashing.
That is the piece that um I think has
been the thing that I've really
struggled with.
Why am I so [__] up?
Yeah. Why am I so [__] up? You know,
there's um
there's this incredible thing about the
human design. So, when you think about
human beings and you know, as a as a
parent, so my husband and I have three
kids. uh one's 23 uh another one's 21
and then our son is 16
and as a young parent I would often
feel this incredible sense of awe like
it is remarkable
how many babies are born when you think
about how many things have to go right
you know what [laughter] I mean in the
design of a human being and there is so
much elegance and beauty and
sophistication and genius to the human
design. It's just shocking. But there is
one fundamental flaw that screws up
everybody. And that is that when you're
a little kid and things happen to you.
You do not have the life experience and
you do not have the support system to be
able to process what is happening. And
it could be anything. It could be
something as serious as homelessness and
poverty and systemic discrimination. It
could be violence. It could be abuse in
your home. It could be addiction, mental
illness. It could be chaos in your
household. It could be sexual abuse. It
could just be a mother or a father who's
so freaking critical or who is passive
aggressive. So, you wake up as a kid and
you have no idea what you're going to
wake up to. But when something goes
wrong or something happens to you as a
kid, you don't have the life experience
or the support structure to basically
go, whoa,
this situation is [__] or these
adults, somebody call the police. Like
this is not okay. You don't get to talk
to me like like no kid does that. The
fundamental flaw in human design is that
when something happens to you as a kid,
you don't say, "What's wrong with that
kid?" or "What's wrong with my dad?" or
"What's wrong with this situation?" You
say, "What's wrong with me?" We aim it
back at ourselves. And then I think
that, you know, this then starts to
build as a thinking pattern that there
must be something wrong with me that you
aim everything that's happening out
there
back at yourself.
And you did that through your early ch
early adulthood, right?
I think everybody does. I really do. I I
think that that you know when you're um
growing up I believe that this happens
around the age of eight or nine or 10
that you know no human being is born and
hates themselves. We're actually wired
for love. We're wired for connection.
Um, you know, if you look at a kid who's
two or three or four, right, and they
see a mirror, they don't look at it and
go, "Gh, my thighs are so fat. Like, I
can't, you know, they look at the mirror
and they put their hands up and they
twirl and they kiss the mirror and they
d they love the sight of themselves."
And you and I don't remember this, but
we loved the sight of ourselves, too.
And what happens because that's your
natural state. That's your wired state
in my opinion. You are wired for
self-love. You are wired for
self-acceptance. You are wired for
self-worth. You are wired for
self-respect. You're wired for
resilience. I mean, when you think about
uh a baby, none of us remember this, but
you will literally fall down 77 times an
hour and you'll just keep standing back
up. So this resilience, this sense of
empowerment, this sense of really being
proud of yourself, of loving yourself.
It is part of your design, your DNA,
your birthright. But life happens. And
it can happen two ways. You know, if you
grow up in a chaotic household, you
start to absorb the message that
something's wrong. And so you go into
modes of behavior to protect yourself.
And these patterns of behavior that you
create to protect yourself get locked in
your brain. But for everybody, so if you
grew up in a in a wonderful household
like I did, if you grew up in a place
that you were very safe like I did, you
still are going to experience some kind
of trauma because trauma is deeply
personal. And trauma at its at its
simplest form is just a moment when your
nervous system
gets disregulated. a moment where your
whole body turns on an alarm. And when
your whole body turns on an alarm,
whether it's uhoh,
there's the car pulling on the gravel
driveway, the person that drinks and
comes home and is abusive is pulling in.
Or uhoh, mom's got that expression on
her face, I better not say anything. It
can be small moments, big moments. But
when your nervous system goes into a
state of alarm, your brain kicks into
let's record everything in hyper speed
so we can remember this so I can protect
you in the future. And that pattern
locks and that's why so many adults
continue to stay trapped in patterns
from their childhood that they don't
even remember why they have them, how
like any of it. but for everybody. So
that's sort of like if you grow up in a
chaotic household, which I didn't, but I
think what happens developmentally is,
you know, there's this moment when we're
in elementary school, and none of us
remember it, or at least I don't
remember it, but it happens to
everybody, where one day you walk into
elementary school and you're like loving
yourself and you're happy as a clam and
you're just kind of walking up to
whomever and you like yourself and you
love yourself. So you'll go up to
anybody. You'll sit with anybody in the
cafeteria and then I don't know what the
hell happens, but the next day you walk
into that cafeteria, you got your little
hands on your tray, and you start
scanning the room for where you're going
to sit, and all of a sudden, that brain
that is wired for self-love and
self-acceptance flips into the sorting
hat from Harry Potter. And you all of a
sudden see the world in the places that
you belong and the places that you
don't.
And that's how it begins.
And your mind starts to tell you you
can't go there. You don't look like
those kids. Those are the sports kids.
They're going to as a way to protect
you.
But the message that you start to get
from your own brain or from society at
large or from what's going on in your
household is that who you are is not
okay.
When I was reading about your story,
we're talking about education there and
schools. Um, it seemed that you were
quite, I don't know, [clears throat]
disorientated in college when you went
to college and you were
struggling to figure out who you are and
that resulted in quite significant
procrastination and
Oh my god. [laughter]
Yes. Um, so I, you know, I'm very open
about the fact that I struggled with
anxiety for a long time.
Yeah. And um
what's interesting about anxiety is that
you know I'm I'm now talking to you from
the perspective of being 53 years old. I
was like really [__] up. And by [__]
up I mean not that I was like stealing
cars or breaking laws or doing anything
like that but I was not comfortable in
my own body. And the way that I would
describe it is I think from that moment,
literally that moment in fourth grade
that I just shared with you, it makes me
really sad to think about the fact that
I was just a fourth grader that had had
a traumatic experience. I didn't know,
but my nervous system remembered. And so
anytime
I went to bed, I woke up the next
morning with the sensation in my body
that something was wrong.
And any pattern of behavior or thinking
that you start to repeat becomes a
habit. Habits are just patterns. That's
all that they are. And so I had a life
experience because of one incident where
I would wake up every single morning and
feel like something was wrong and I
couldn't put my finger on it. And the
more that you wake up and think
something's wrong, the more your brain
is going to find reasons why something
might be wrong. And so I developed this
sort of chronic state of feeling on
alert, feeling this sense that I got to
be aware,
fight or flight.
Yes. Yes. My, you know, in in clinical
terms, my sympathetic nervous system got
switched on and I had no idea how to
turn it off. And if you don't know how
to calm your nervous system down, to
flip off the sympathetic nervous system
and flip on the parasympathetic nervous
system, which is your calm, grounded,
resting nervous system, you will forever
struggle with focus, with being present,
with the ability to think clearly and
make good decisions. You will constantly
talk about the fact that you feel
anxious and that comes from your nervous
system always being on edge and being in
fight or flight. I didn't know any of
this. I was just a nervous kid with a
nervous stomach. Every camp that I went
to, I got sent home because I was too
homesick. Oh, yeah. I mean, I was just I
mean, you know how homesick you have to
be for trained counselors to actually
call your parents and go, "Uh, we got a
problem here. She can't stay here." like
she is out of her mind.
When you say out of your mind, what what
are the physical symptoms or verbal
symptoms of that?
Oh my gosh. Um complete dis
disassociation. So I would be at camp
like literally sixth grade camp. So at
the end of sixth grade year and I feel I
feel bad for little Mel Robbins. I feel
bad for her because, you know, here's
this this experience, sixth grade camp,
where the entire school for four nights
goes away to a camp, just the sixth
grade. It's supposed to be the
culmination of your sixth grade year.
And I am so freaked out that something
bad is going to happen
that I of course escalate things in my
own mind. I don't even feel like I'm at
camp. I feel like I'm walking on a movie
set. I don't feel like I'm on Earth. I
feel like I'm on a spaceship somewhere
looking down all the time. I uh feel
like I might throw up because my stomach
is rattled. Because when you're anxious
and you can't focus your thoughts, you
tend to not eat. And so that of course
upsets your stomach. It's not that
something bad's going to happen. It's
that you're screwing up the chemistry in
your stomach by not eating because
you're so nervous, which only makes it
worse. And as your mind is scrambling
thinking something bad is going to
happen, and then your stomach is
hurting, then you start to think, "Oh my
god, I'm going to throw up." And then
you start to think, well, if I throw up,
something bad's going to happen and then
the kids are going to laugh and like it
just becomes
this spiral train wreck. And that is the
state that I lived in.
And so, um, you know, you learn how to
cope. You it becomes your new normal.
But that was basically my life.
Constantly feeling like something bad
was going to happen. Constantly feeling
like I wasn't really present. constantly
lying or fibbing about how I felt or
what I was thinking because I didn't
want people to judge me. I mean, it's
awful.
And then you come through college and
you've got to make that choice in life
as to which direction you're going to go
in. It's kind of It seems quite
choice. I love the choice. Yeah.
Yeah. Well, well, how would you define
it?
Um, panic.
Panic. Yeah.
Yeah. Cuz I didn't know what I wanted to
do.
Yeah.
Cuz I had only ever lived in survival
mode. M
so did you did you not take a pause to
decide to sort of listen
who you were and what your your calling
was and
take a pause when you have anxiety
your whole mode of living is if I'm on
the move no one can catch me if I am on
the run I'm safe
and so what's interesting is that I
think the only time in my life that I
have actually slowed down was during the
pandemic
[clears throat]
Does that sound familiar?
Yeah, of course. Yeah. Had no choice.
Yeah. And one of the hardest things
which became one of the greatest
realizations
is
truly coming face to face with myself
and realizing
that even though I have done all this
work to heal trauma, even though I have
uh done extraordinary things in terms of
my own thinking patterns,
that there was a level to which I was
still on the
that I was darting off to a coffee shop
or darting off to Target or darting off
to an airplane. And all of this racing
around kept me from having to truly stop
and stand with the woman in the mirror
and just be still and figure out, well,
what do I really want? How do I really
want to feel?
You talk about the topic of distraction
and procrastination and it's rarely in
this context but it sounds like a form
of distraction distracting yourself from
the from taking a moment to to confront
thyself and
um yeah to really ask some of those
questions which I guess if you're in a
fight or survival state um the answers
to to some of those questions might be
maybe illuminating to a vulnerable you
know to to to to an extent which will
make you feel vulnerable and unsafe
because those are pretty like
existential questions to ask yourself to
look at yourself and say who am I and
what do I want and you know how do I get
it it's much easier as you say just to
be swept by the tide
and that's a form of short-term defense
it feels like a short termist we'll just
get to tomorrow you know
and some people go through their lives
doing that right
oh I was yeah
I was you know I think that there's also
sort of layers of healing on issues And
so, you know, when I remembered the sort
of initial incident and I started to
kind of string together, holy cow, like
all of this is connected
in a really interesting way.
Um, compounding itself, right?
Yeah.
Talking about it is one layer. And it's
a super important thing to do to give
yourself the gift of sitting down with
somebody who is licensed or who has an
expertise in helping you unpack
what happened. Because it's only in
being able to talk through what happened
that you have the ability to start to
free yourself from what happened. like
if you can't reveal it, you are
definitely not going to heal from it.
And so I had done the layer of talking
about it. And then I had gone and done
the layer even underneath it of
understanding
what had happened and understanding how
it connected to anxiety and how it
connected how trauma connected to that
and understanding the lying piece. And I
had even gone and done the layer
underneath that which was starting to
interrupt the old patterns that would
get triggered and put in new patterns.
But it wasn't until recently that I went
to the layer that you need to go to to
truly heal, which is to repair
the nervous system.
And you know what what is uh interesting
to me about kind of even the whole
journey is that you know I've had layer
after layer after layer for me talking
about it was very freeing and you know
people always say to me oh my god you're
so relatable like we open up boom right
out of the gate I tell you something
that normally somebody reveals like an
hour in. It's because I have a level of
freedom around it and I also know it's a
shared experience that so many people
can relate to on some level. Um,
but it wasn't until I understood how it
impacts your nervous system and the
connection between your mind, body, and
spirit that I began to realize what I
think it was Michael Poland or Tim
Ferrris on one of his podcasts said,
which is
if you didn't talk yourself into this
[__] you're not going to talk yourself
out of it. Like, you have to have a
corresponding
physical intervention.
if there was something physical that
disrupted your body state to begin with.
And that makes a lot of sense to me. It
makes a lot of sense to me that if your
nervous system or your brain recorded an
experience like I can give you a benign
example uh for people that don't that
have never really kind of thought
through what trauma actually means, why
it's deeply personal, how it's a
physical experience, not just a mental
experience. So, when I was um God, how
old was I? I I guess I was I must have
been in high school. We were driving to
northern Michigan and it was a huge
snowstorm and my mom was behind the
wheel and my dad and my brother were in
the car in front of us and there was a
radio on and um all of a sudden the
radio announcer said something about
black ice and this truck pulled out to
try to pass us
and right as he tried to pass us could
see headlights coming on
and my mom said, "Oh my god, hold on."
cuz the truck started to veer back in.
So I remembered the words black ice. Oh
my god, hold on. And the next thing I
remember, we were in the it was like a
SUV. The car rolled over, right? Several
times. And the experience of being in
that car was like um imagine sitting in
a dryer
and you're sitting still like
but the clothes are tumbling around you,
right? And so like, you know, the
McDonald's bag went flying past us and
the dog went flying past us and all this
stuff. And we and I remember
even though I don't remember getting
tumbled around, I remember this
unbelievable sound that was like crunch
of the car rolling and packing down the
snow.
Now, we ended up with the car on its
side and I was like thrown to the back
seat. The dog was in the way back, but
my mom was buckled in at the top. We
were fine. Little shaken up. Think my
mom might have had a concussion. We
survived. Nobody died. They flipped the
car back over. We climbed in with my
dad. Off we went. Now, here's what's
interesting about that experience. I was
never scared to drive ever. I didn't
ever really even think about it. Um,
but it was a traumatic experience
because my body remembers it
and it remembers it in a certain way. I
don't ever think about the experience if
I'm driving a car. That's not a trigger
for my body to remember it. But if I
walk to my mailbox in Boston,
Massachusetts, after a freshly fallen
snow, and I step on the snow and it
goes,
I feel like I'm back in that car because
that sound is a trigger for my nervous
system to remember.
Now, that sound of me stepping on
freshly fallen snow,
my mom does that all day long in
Michigan and doesn't think about the
accident. But if somebody ever says the
two words black ice around my mom, she
feels like she's in that car accident
because that's her trigger for her
nervous system to remember it. So the
reason why I tell that story is because
I didn't understand trauma. I thought
trauma was like for victims of war.
That's what you experience if you, you
know, do a tour of duty. Somebody who
has been the victim of a super violent
crime. I did not realize that trauma is
a disruption in your nervous system that
sends your brain into a mode where your
brain like holds down the shutter on a
camera and is like snap snap snap snap
snap snap snap. All five senses
recording everything it can possibly
grab as a way to protect you in the
future. When I started to understand
that oh my god patterns of behavior get
triggered by smell, they get triggered
by sound. They get triggered by music.
they get triggered by and the same thing
with patterns of thinking.
Now I had the missing piece to be able
to start to truly reset not only my
nervous system but also the default
patterns in my mind and I haven't looked
back since. But that was step one. Um,
in terms of how I stopped the cascade of
the what if this happens and what if
that happens and what if this happens
and what and what are they thinking and
why didn't they invite me here and what
and the universal thing that I started
to replace the what if with was what if
it all works out? What if this is the
best thing that ever happened to me?
What if this is really hard and it does
suck?
That's not easy.
But it turns out to be the best thing
that I ever did.
It's not easy though, is it?
No. It's very simple to do, but it's not
easy. And it's not easy because you love
patterns. Like we don't it doesn't
that's not even the right way to say it.
It's not easy because you're so used to
thinking a certain way.
And you and as you write about, you
know, one of the things I scribbled down
was that you said feelings are merely
suggestions, ones you can ignore. But we
go through life, no one's ever said that
to us before. We go through life
thinking that our thoughts are ourselves
and that that is an instruction from
ourselves and that's my voice in my head
telling me what to do and I must my job
is just to obey. So if it says you know
this ice means danger then I you know
and we accept our thoughts and when I've
sat here with guests you know who have
spent a lot of time working on the brain
and understanding the difference between
thoughts and are they true and it
appears to be that you can analyze a
thought and accept or reject which is a
compelling
well the way that I put it or I like to
think about it is this you can be two
things at once.
So you can have the feeling
of being really frustrated with somebody
and that can be true and you can also
love them at the same time. You can be
jealous of somebody and you can also
allow that to inspire you at the same
time. You can be afraid,
which is true, and you can still find
the willpower to push yourself or
discipline to push yourself forward. You
[clears throat] can be deeply in a state
of grief,
having experienced one of the biggest
losses or betrayals of your life, and
still experience a moment of joy as
you're standing on the ocean and
watching some bird dive into the sea.
[clears throat] Human beings are very
complex. And when you start to
understand you're not just one thing, it
gives you freedom to ride the waves of
feelings, to ride the waves of
experience and to kind of go down and
go, "Oh [__] this is a terrible thing."
And know
that you will be able to come out the
other side of it. And so, you know, I I
think that that emotions, yeah, they are
suggestions and that's one way to
dismantle it. Another way to dismantle
kind of the way that an emotion can hook
you is to keep reminding yourself that
it's temporary.
This wave of pissed-offness, this wave
of betrayal, this wave of fear, this
wave of grief, this wave of frustration,
this wave of feeling stuck, this wave of
feeling hopeless,
it's temporary.
It will come and it will go. And when
you realize that emotions are temporary,
it also gives you perspective, right? To
know that something better is coming.
And that's going to help you be able to
endure whatever it is that you're
enduring.
Why should you drink fuel? We're going
into the fourth quarter of the year.
Diets are dropping off. We're becoming
lazier and lazier. And what tends to
happen when when our diets dip and we we
start to become less um compelled to go
to the gym is yeah we get out of shape
we start to feel low energy. We start to
binge eat bad things. And hu is the
antidote. It's nutritionally complete.
So you get everything you need for your
diet in a drink. You get your 20 grams
of proteins. You're going to get your 26
vitamins vitamins and minerals. It's low
sugar, high in fiber. It really is the
cure to a lot of the health issues that
we see in our personal lives, but in
wider society. If you've never tried it,
all I'll ask you to do is give it a try.
And if you're like me, then you will
like the World Berry Ready to drink.
You'll like the mac and cheese, which is
just selling like absolutely crazy,
unsurprisingly. Um, you'll like the
cinnamon, and you'll like the banana
flavor. Those are my recommendations. I
know a lot of people love the chocolate
flavor. Let me know. Try it. Get
yourself healthy and send me a message
on Instagram. Tag me on Instagram as
well on your stories if you do drink try
it out because I I sometimes upload
those tags and let me know which is your
favorite flavor. Can't wait to hear from
you.
So that was step one. I dug a little
deeper on that step one phase which was
that you know the kind of mental work.
What was step two of your
level four overcoming um the the trauma.
So the first step was combating the
thoughts in my head, seeing them,
interrupting them. I'm not thinking
about that. And then, you know, I went a
little bit further and then started to
figure out, well, if I think this, I'd
rather be thinking this. And so then I
started working on replacing the
thoughts so that the default became
different. The next step though was
a deeper understanding
of anxiety and really studying it
because I was tired of being anxious. I
was tired of taking Zoloft. And look,
Zoloft saved my life. I mean, I was on
that drug for two and a half decades for
crying out loud. Uh, one of my kids take
Zoloft and it helped them climb out of a
hole. It is I love medication. Like, I'm
not here saying nobody should be on
medication. It's the opposite. I think
that you it's self harm not to take
medication if you're in a hole and that
medication can serve as a ladder to help
you climb out of it. But I was at a
point where, you know, I'm 45 years old.
I've been on this drug for a long time.
I've been out teaching the 5-second
rule. I'm interrupting thoughts. I'm
starting to feel like, wow, I actually
have the ability to not think what I
have always thought. I actually have the
ability to shut that worry down. And so
as I started to understand what anxiety
really is. So anxiety is a really
important thing. Anxiety is an alarm
system in your body. If you and I hop in
a car and we drive off to have dinner
and a truck pulls out, right, and cuts
us off and you immediately swerve, what
do you feel in your body?
It feels like something rising in my
belly and making me like a little burst
of nervousness. Yeah.
Yeah. Your heart races, your armpits
sweat, your hands get clammy. You jerk
the wheel. Yeah. Fight or flight.
Yeah.
The alarm is sounding the alarm cuz
there's danger.
Well, what happens the second the the
truck pulls away in your body.
Well, it should go back to a a calm
state and I should my my respiratory
system should start to function as
normal. My dietary tract should start to
engage. We should start burning the
carbs again in my belly. Yeah.
And things should go to back to normal.
That's from a biological perspective.
Yes. Exactly. And the reason why that
happens is because your mind
has the vision of the truck pulling
away. So your mind tells your body
threat is over.
For [clears throat] a person that
experiences anxiety
over and over and over like at their
default state, what's happened is
you're standing in your kitchen and all
of a sudden you feel that tidal wave
that you and I felt when the truck
pulled into our lane, but there's no
threat.
And so as the rush hits your body, your
mind starts scrambling looking for what
in the kitchen is threatening me and
there's nothing there. And since you
know the science of the body, all the
blood when you go into fight or flight
goes to your major organs, it leaves
your digestive tract. Your stomach
starts to gurgle. Most people think
butterflies means they're [__] No.
Butterflies just means the blood left
your stomach to go to your heart and now
your digestive chemistry has changed.
That's all that's happening. It doesn't
mean you're about to die, but we misread
it because we don't understand it. And
so then once you go, "Oh, I'm [__] My
stomach hurts and now I'm feeling." Now
your mind escalates it and your mind
starts freaking out. And when your mind
starts freaking out, then your body
freaks out more. And that's when the
grand panic attack happens, which is an
emergency break. It's it's designed to
get you to stop thinking and to just
remove yourself. And if you've ever seen
somebody have a panic attack, they dart
around a room, they can't breathe, and
they feel like they've got to leave
whatever situation they're in. This is
how your body is designed to get you out
of emergencies.
The problem with somebody who gets a
disregulated nervous system is you feel
like a truck's about to pull in your
lane all the time, but your brain can't
understand why you feel that way because
there is no truck.
Your body just got stuck there. And so
when I started to understand that, I
found this really interesting piece of
research um from Harvard Medical School
called reframing performance anxiety
where researchers wanted to know since
you know people really screw up tests
when they get nervous, right? You know,
you get nervous about a test and then
you can't focus and so you blow it
because you've got performance anxiety
or athletes that really blow it when
they get nervous before a game. Well,
medically speaking,
there is no physiological difference in
your body state physiologically speaking
between being nervous and being excited.
Zero difference. So, exactly what you
talked about when the truck pulled into
the lane in the example that I gave,
that experience that made you feel
nervous,
when you feel excited, the same thing
happens. Your heart races. The blood
leaves your digestive tract and goes up
to your major organs. Your armpits start
to sweat. Your throat feels tight. Your
hands get clammy. Exact same
physiological experience.
Excitement and nervous. The only
difference between a situation that
makes you excited and a situation that
makes you nervous is what your brain is
saying about what's happening. So, if
you're in a situation where you're like,
"Oh my god, I'm going to screw up this
test. You know, this is going to be
terrible." And you start working
yourself up and I'm so nervous. I'm so
nerv I'm going to blow this interview.
I'm so nervous. Of course, you're going
to start sweating. Of course, your
heart's going to race. If you and I are
about to go see our favorite musician,
let's say we have front row tickets.
Adele is going to play right here in
London. We are right there. Oh my god,
she's about to come on stage. My heart's
racing. My armpits are sweating.
I'm excited because my brain's going
Adele's about to be there. So the body
makes sense in the excitement situation.
So the researchers at Harvard wanted to
know well given that physiologically
it's the exact same experience. Is it
possible to trick the dra brain in a
moment when you're nervous and make your
brain think you're excited? And if you
did trick your brain in a moment when
you were nervous to believe that you
were actually excited, would it impact
your ability to perform?
And the answer is yes. You can trick
your brain in a situation where you're
nervous to believe that you're actually
excited. And yes, it profoundly impacts
your ability to perform. And so they put
people in control groups in um like a
karaoke competition, a negotiation
competition, a standardized test, and a
track meet. And there were only uh the
only difference between the groups is
one group was taught in a situation that
made them nervous to simply say as dumb
as this sounds, I'm so excited. I'm so
excited to run this race. I'm so excited
to take this test. I'm so excited to get
out there and sing. I'm even though they
felt nervous, I'm so excited. And the
people that were taught to say, I'm so
excited, outperformed the people who had
no tools. And the reason can be
explained by chemistry and physiology
and neurology. If you get too nervous
and you start to get too worked up and
your thoughts start to spin and your
body stays in a fight orflight state,
your brain releases cortisol and
cortisol impacts your brain's ability to
focus. So all your preparation goes out
the window because you just blew it with
the cortisol in your brain. When you
say, "I'm excited." Even if you feel
nervous,
your brain buys it and doesn't release
cortisol, which allows you to focus on
what you need to do. And so, I started
experimenting with this because I was
deathly afraid of flying. And at the age
of 45, I'm now all of a sudden because
of that TEDex talk starting to take off
on the speaking circuit and I'm having
to board planes and I'm being bombarded
with these thoughts of I'm going to die.
I'm never going to see my kids get
married. I is my husband going to
remarry. You know, will I make it? And
so I said, I got to figure out a better
way. And so I stumbled into this project
and I came up with this strategy. And
this is freaking genius. I've taught it
to millions of people. It's curing
people's anxiety. I kid you not.
Therapists are using this around the
world. It is extraordinary.
So before you have to do something that
makes you nervous, come up with uh
anything that you can grab on to that
makes you excited about what you're
doing. So, for example, with the example
of flying, before I get on an airplane,
I mean, I'm not afraid to fly at all
anymore, but back in the day, back when
I eight years ago, before I would get on
a plane, so I'm flying to London, I
would think of something I'm excited to
do when I get to London. And so, before
I board that plane in Boston, I would
think about coming here and meeting
Stephen and getting to hang out with
him. When I get on that plane and we're
up in the air and all of a sudden we
start bouncing around like, you know,
something. Yeah. Like turbulence in the
air and my body goes, "Oh my god."
I close my eyes and go, "I am so excited
to see Stephen. This is going to be
amazing." And what happens is that my
mind goes, "Oh, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa.
Hold on. Hold on. She's not nervous.
She's excited to see Stephen."
and your body literally settles
and your mind locks on to this thing
that makes sense because I'm going to
London. I'm going to see you and if I'm
going to see you, the plane obviously
makes it. So, there's nothing to worry
about. And it took me about five or six
times of doing it and I stopped having
any kind of anxiety whatsoever about
flying.
It's really interesting. so many
different my brain fizzled off into so
many different like a flowchart but um
you know a lot of people talk about
anxiety being this like concern about
the future right and from one
perspective I was thinking then as
you're saying that what you're actually
doing is making the future a a really
nice place so your brain is saying this
plane is going to crash the future is
death
and you're it sounded like you're
hijacking it saying in fact in fact
brain the future is really really
pleasant I get to go and see Stephen
which and it's That's what it sounded
like. But I but I have to I just
completely resonate. And anyone that's
really listened to to me, even in two
episodes ago, one of the questions I was
asked was about imposter syndrome. And
my response to that was I don't
necessarily feel like I've experienced
imposter syndrome. And the example I
give is when I'm in Brazil and I know
I'm going up on stage and bal
I I always say this on the podcast, I
have the same butterflies as everyone
else has, but my brain is telling me
that I'm excited, right?
And it's done that so many times. And
because I think because it does that and
then it goes well, it's reinforcing that
that is in fact excitement and next time
you you know and it's and it's kept that
fear at bay. But
can I unpack what just happened?
So for most people butterflies in your
stomach is a trigger that makes you
believe something bad's about to happen.
[clears throat]
And I have a theory about it. The number
one fear in kids is throwing up. Number
two is their parents dying, but number
one, according to pediatricians, is the
fear of throwing up because it's this
this intense moment of losing control.
[clears throat]
And so, tons of little kids,
have an enormous fear of throwing up,
and the trigger of your stomach rumbling
or butterflies triggers that fear. And
so I think there's been a lifetime
negative association with having
butterflies.
What you did is you took a very common
experience that's a negative trigger for
people. So the physical sensation of
your stomach being upset triggers
negative thought patterns. Uhoh. Uhoh.
Uhoh. I'm in trouble. I'm in trouble.
I'm in trouble.
Yeah.
And then that sticks.
What you've done is you've hijacked it
and you've labeled that feeling in your
stomach as something positive. I'm
really excited
100%. But I don't deserve credit for
that because it was never it was I' I
figured that out in hindsight only from
hearing someone that suffers with nerves
and then seeing the consequence of the
the impact that nerves have when they go
up [clears throat] on stage and me being
like, "Okay, I have that bit. I have the
feeling, but my brain isn't fearful."
and then it goes well for me and that
reinforces me and creates this
compounding positive cycle in my life
now where I can walk up on stage with
Obama and yeah I'm feeling it backstage
but I'm like I can't wait to get get up
on stage right and this kind of speaks
to a confidence all of these things
because once you get stuck in that
negative reinforcing downward cycle and
I tell you the downward cycle goes much
faster than the upward cycle like one
incident can make that confidence drop
and then [snorts] um it's hard to get
out of it's hard to get out You know, I
guess hijacking it in the way you've
described is is a definite solution.
Well, you know what I just got really
excited about is that
let's go back to the fact that your
brain learns patterns. [clears throat]
And even though you may feel stuck, even
though you may feel hopeless,
you're not broken. You have patterns of
thinking and patterns of behavior that
are broken for where you are and where
you want to go in life.
And what's super exciting is that when
you start to think about changing your
life through the lens of just looking
for patterns, breaking them, and
replacing them, it becomes less
personal. And I believe especially after
what I've experienced with the high-
five habit
that you know there's a lot of research
in in habits obviously about how long it
takes a new habit to stick
and it's anywhere from according to a
lot of people 21 days to 63 days
depending upon what you're looking at in
terms of the mind body spirit. I
personally have a theory that if you
don't like the new habit, you're never
going to make it stick. Like I don't
like getting out of bed in the morning.
I've been using the 5-second rule 54321
for 13 years.
Can we talk about that? I feel like we
brushed over that a little bit. So
this 5-second rule
um you released the book, I think 2017,
called the 5-second rule. And it's all
about, you know, well, you tell me what
it's about, where it came from. I know
there was a rocket. You're watching a
rocket on TV. [laughter] Um, and that
was a little bit of the initial
inspiration, but where did this come
from and what is it?
Well, so you know, I I think I alluded
to earlier that um it seems like my
version of personal development requires
me to fall into a hole or dig one and
then I realize nobody's coming to rescue
me and I'm if I want to get out of the
hole, I'm going to need to build a
freaking ladder. Um, and so at the age
of 40, I found myself in a place that I
just never envisioned I would be. And
that is, uh, I had my husband and I had
three kids under the age of 10. And I
was unemployed. And my husband had been
in the restaurant business with his best
friend. And the housing crisis hit,
especially hit in the United States. And
we found ourselves 800 grand in debt
because we had secured the restaurant
business like complete morons with our
kids' college fund and our house and
every credit card and the home equity
line and the cars and everything. And
that's great when your business is
working. It's absolutely terrifying when
it's not. And so I would wake up every
morning
just pinned to the bed with anxiety. And
I became somebody that I barely
recognized. I was screaming at Chris. I
was drinking myself into the ground. I
The kids were missing the bus every day.
I didn't have a job. I was hiding from
my friends. I hadn't told my family what
was going on. Uh and and you know, the
thing that's that's that's interesting
about being stuck in life is that the
fact is you know what you need to do.
That's the easy part. And if you don't
know what you need to do to improve the
situation in, Google it. There's
approximately a bazillion videos out
there of people like you that have been
in the exact same situation. They will
walk you through how to There are books
you can buy. There are courses that the
the what you need to do is out there.
It's the how. How the [__] do you make
yourself do what you need to do when you
are scared or overwhelmed or anxious or
hopeless or depressed or any of the
stuff that happens to you as a human?
That's the $100 million question. And at
the time, I didn't have the answer. I
knew I needed to look for a job. I knew
I needed to stop streaming at Chris. I
knew I needed to get the kids on the
bus. I knew I needed to ask for help. I
wasn't doing any of those things. I was
stuck in broken patterns. And I didn't
know any of the things that we're
talking about right now.
But one night, you know, I was sitting
there and I was watching TV and I was
telling myself, "Tomorrow morning, it's
got to be the new you." I've given
myself that lame pep talk like Mel,
you've got to stop drinking. You have
got to be nice to Chris. You have got to
pull your [__] together. You got to look
for a job. And by God, woman, when that
alarm rings, you cannot lay there like a
human pot roast, marinating in fear and
staring at the ceiling. You have got to
get out of bed, woman. And then all of a
sudden, this is divine intervention.
The rocket ship launches across a
television screen, Stephen. And I say,
"That's it. That's it. Tomorrow morning
when the alarm goes off, Mel Robbins,
you're going to launch yourself out of
bed like a rocket ship. You're going to
move so fast, you're not going to be in
that bed when that anxiety hits. Now, it
was either God or bourbon. One of those
two things gave me the idea because it
sounds dumb. Okay, Mel, you're going to
beat anxiety by moving fast. That sounds
great. Well, the very next morning, it
was a Tuesday in February outside of
Boston, Massachusetts in 2008, the alarm
went off. And I think a lot about this
moment
because if I hadn't
done what I did that morning,
my life would have gone in a totally
different direction.
I'd probably be divorced. I'd probably
be an alcoholic. My family would be torn
apart. No idea what I'd be doing for a
living or where I would be.
And I profoundly believe
that you are one decision away from a
different life.
And that happened to me on a February
morning in 2008.
The alarm rang. And
as soon as the alarm rang, I remembered
the idea of launching myself out of bed.
And then I did
what psychologists call
a bias toward thinking. And this window
opens up when you start to think about
what you need to do instead of doing
what you need to do. It's this window of
hesitation that's about 5 seconds long.
A window of hesitation that defines your
whole life.
Inside this window of hesitation
lives anxiety and procrastination and
fear and imposttor syndrome and
overwhelm. All patterns of thinking, all
patterns of feeling, all patterns of
behavior
that get triggered in this 5-second
window of thinking about what you need
to do because it's in the thinking that
you go from being present to all the
patterns kicking in and the coping
mechanisms that you have. And so for
whatever reason, I started to think
about getting up and all the [__]
started to come in. I don't feel like
it. How's it going to help? I don't want
to. For whatever reason, I just started
counting backwards.
5 4 3 2 1.
And I stood up.
And I used it the next morning and the
next morning. And by the third morning,
I was kind of freaked out because I'm
like, "Okay, this is working.
This is weird.
And I said,
Mel, I made myself a promise. If at any
moment
you know what you need to do, but you
don't feel like it, just count backwards
and let's just see what happens.
And so I started using it, Stephen, in
this little count backwards technique. 5
4 3 2 1. No idea why it's working, by
the way. Um, in any moment I'd see
Chris, I'd want to kill him. 5 4 3 2 1.
All of a sudden, I'm calm. I can speak
to him from a more supportive place.
Kids are irritating. 5 4 3 2 1. Take a
breath. And now I can be the mom that I
know I want to be. 5 4 3 2 1 I'm going
out the door to exercise. 5 4 3 2 1 I'm
picking up the phone and I'm networking.
5 4 3 2 1. I'm picking up the phone and
calling my parents and asking for help.
And slowly but surely, one decision at a
time using the 5-second rule. And the
5-second rule is very simple. The moment
you have an instinct to move, you got to
do it within 5 seconds or your brain
will kill it. And counting backwards is
critical. I now know why it works. When
you count backwards 5 4 3 2 1, you
interrupt habit loops stored in your
basil ganglia. And the counting
backwards requires focus. So it awakens
this sucker right here, your prefrontal
cortex. It's referred to as a starting
ritual in habit research, a cheat code
for your brain. And um
basically I used it in secret for 3
years cuz I mean what am I going to do?
Tell people you can count to five and
you change your life? I mean it sounds
ridiculous. Plus I was just trying to
survive. I'm trying to like find a job
and save my marriage and help my husband
and make sure my kids are okay and start
to pay our bills and make the ends meet.
And that's what I was doing. And one
thing led to another and um
word got out about it and people started
to write to me about it and um it has
now gone on to change the lives of
millions of people. We know of 111
people who have stopped themselves from
attempting suicide by counting backwards
54 321. When I had a daytime talk show,
an entire wing of um nurses from an
inpatient unit at a psychiatric uh
hospital in Philadelphia came to my talk
show and explained to me after the show
that of all the tools that they have
when they discharge somebody from an
inpatient commitment that the 5-second
rule is the most effective thing that
they have,
except for medication, obviously, but
it's the most effective thing that they
have because it's simple.
and you can remember it and anybody can
use it and it works. And I think we make
a huge mistake in life. We make the
mistake of believing that because our
problems are big or because our dreams
are so big that somehow the solution to
achieving
those dreams or to solving those
problems must be enormous too. when in
truth it's the opposite. The larger the
problem, the smaller the solution. The
bigger the dream, the smaller the
actions are that you need to start
taking.
Super compelling because that also has a
lot of similarities with your with your
new book. [laughter]
The high five habit.
It does. Yeah.
So, I'd love to hear the story of um of
how this was born. And I imagine, you
know, that that came out of, as you
said, a low point in your life where you
were you were looking for
what you thought would probably be a
complex solution to a set of complex
sort of problems and dynamics in your
life. But um the high five habit is more
centered around gratitude and um
I guess like self- appreciation. Is that
an accurate description of of the
habitab? Yeah. like it's um you know
even knowing what I know about the
5-second rule, I believe the high- five
habit is a thousand times more powerful.
And the reason why I say that is because
the 5-second rule will help you break
patterns of behavior. It'll help you
push through fear. It'll help you take
action. It'll help you interrupt
thoughts. It will help you walk away
from things, define boundaries. Um it's
very actionoriented.
Overcome procrastination.
Yeah, overcome procrastination.
The high- five habit works at a much
deeper level.
It solves what I believe is everybody's
core issue and problem. And that is the
issue and the habit of hating yourself,
of criticizing yourself, of not liking
yourself, of beating yourself up.
And
as successful as I've become and as much
as I've accomplished, it wasn't until I
stumbled into the high- five habit that
I truly confronted the fact that in
spite of all that success, I still
didn't like myself. I still judged the
woman in the mirror. I was still in many
ways betting against myself by
constantly beating the hell out of
myself. And it was a habit. And you
know, we talked in the very beginning
about how we go from being children that
are wired to love ourselves to the ways
in which life can make you start to feel
what's wrong with me and the ways in
which your brain starts to turn and
filter the world in a way where you see
everything that you're not and all the
ways that you don't fit in and all the
things that aren't working out. And that
was exactly my experience. And I think
it's every single human being's
experience. I don't care how successful
you are. And so the high- five habit is
very, very simple. And first I'll tell
you what it is and then I'll explain the
story. So I'm on a mission to
get every single human being on the
planet to add high-fiving themselves in
the mirror to their morning routine.
That right after you brush your teeth,
as ubiquitous as it is for people to
brush their teeth in the morning, let's
get rid of the skanky breath so you
don't drag it through your day. I want
you to literally wipe clean your mind,
body, and spirit so you don't drag
generational gunk and patterns into your
day. And it's that simple. Put down the
toothbrush, look at yourself in the
mirror, raise your hand, and send
yourself into your day, knowing that you
have your own back. Knowing that no
matter what happens today, you will be
here there to support you and encourage
you no matter what. because you haven't
been. And um the way I discovered it was
um in April of 2020. And you know, the
backdrop doesn't even matter. I mean,
what was happening is a universal
experience. I was just at a moment where
I was overwhelmed by my life. There was
a lot of [__] going on in my business.
There was a lot of stuff going on in the
world. Uh a couple of my kids were
really in a state of being anxious and
upset about things. And I just woke up
morning after morning feeling the weight
of the world on my shoulders, feeling
like if one more thing happened, I just
can't cope. And I think that that's
something that we all feel at times in
our life, whether somebody just breaks
up with you or you lose a job or you
don't get the funding you wanted or you
lose an election you went for or you
just feel lost in your life or maybe
your parents are sick. Just this feeling
of I just can't take it. I I just don't
know how I'm going to deal with the
demands of my life. And that was me. And
so one morning I'm standing in my
bathroom and I'm brushing my teeth and
I'm there in my underwear and I look at
myself in the mirror and my first
thought is,
"Oh my god,
you look like hell."
And then I immediately
out of habit
start picking my appearance apart. I
mean, look at the dark circles and your
gray hair and your saggy neck and god,
one boob is lower than the other. You
look like [__] Mel.
And the second your mind goes negative,
you already alluded to this. It's like,
you know, more negative thoughts climb
on. And so then I drift into my day and
it's not like, yes, it's like, why did I
get up so late? And you got a Zoom call
in eight minutes. Oh my god, I haven't
even walked the dog yet. And oh, I
forgot to text Stephen back and just the
beatdown begins.
And I believe that my experience that
morning is everybody's experience. And I
know based on research that it is that
we talk a big game about gratitude and
and meditation and morning routines, but
we've skipped this one thing that's
happening in everybody's morning
routine. And it's a habit of
selfrejection,
of self-criticism.
And every human being has it. I kid you
not. And
standing there that morning overwhelmed
by life, giving myself the morning just
kind of beat down and, you know,
negativity,
I couldn't think of anything to say to
myself. And I wouldn't have believed it
anyway because I felt overwhelmed. And
as pathetic as it sounds, I don't know
what came over me, but for whatever
reason, again, I think it was probably
divine intervention,
I just dog at my feet, underwear on, no
bra, I just raised my hand and I gave
the woman in the mirror a high five
because she looked like she needed one.
That very first one, a couple things
happened. I actually laughed cuz it was
so cheesy. I now know that the reason
why I laughed is because your brain
drips dopamine when you give somebody a
high five.
And then I felt like a a switch flip.
And it wasn't like I was like, "Yes."
But I just felt myself go from this very
low state. I didn't even think any
words, but energetically I felt myself
go from feeling defeated to sort of a
like, "Come on now, you got a roof over
your head. It's not that bad. Get your
ass out." Like, it was kind of like that
kind of tough coach kind of mustering of
an energy.
But Stephen, it was the second morning
when everything broke wide open. So, I
wake up, same problem, same kind of
energetic, depleted overwhelm. 5 4 3 2 1
I get out of bed. I make [snorts] my
bed. Um, and as I'm walking to the
bathroom, I'm not even to the bathroom
yet. And then it freaking hits me. I
realize I'm experiencing something I've
never felt in my entire adult life. And
what I'm experiencing is this.
When you go and you're about to meet
somebody at a cafe that you really love
and you're about to walk in the door,
what are you feeling?
uh excitement, positive anticipation.
Um yeah.
Yeah.
I felt that about seeing myself.
Now, I've felt excited to see an outfit
or a haircut.
I don't ever recall as an adult feeling
excited to see the human being Mel
Robbins.
Why were you excited?
I was excited because
the experience of high-fiving yourself
is more than a gesture.
It creates partnership
and there's a sense that you're
returning home.
The same way that a neighbor waves to
you and sees you, I knew that I would
have that experience with myself as soon
as I rounded the corner and walked into
that bathroom.
Because what I realized that second
morning as I rounded the corner and
walked into the bathroom
is that there's actually two human
beings in the bathroom every morning.
There's you and there's a human being in
the mirror.
And that human being is trying
and they've been there a long time and
they've been waiting for you to wake up
and to see them. They're tired of your
constant negativity. They're tired of
you beating them down. They need you to
be more encouraging. They need you to be
more celebratory. They need your
support.
And when you finally wake up and create
a moment with yourself
every single morning where you look
yourself in the eye and you see yourself
and you forgive yourself and you honor
yourself and you say I believe with this
gesture in you.
It is this remarkably deep and s
spiritual feeling of connection that
you've been longing for for a very long
time.
And so that second morning, you know,
I'm realizing, holy cow, it's like this
sort of, it's sort of like when you
first realize that the voice in your
head isn't you,
and you have this whole paradigm shift.
When you allow yourself to understand
the depth of what I'm trying to teach
you, there will be a paradigm shift
that will fundamentally change how you
live your life. The hardest part is
looking at yourself.
50% of men and women cannot or will not
look at themselves in the mirror
because they are either disgusted or
disappointed with where they are in
life. And if you cannot look at yourself
in the mirror, that is an act of
self-rejection.
That is an act of self-criticism. That
is an act of self-hatred.
That's not just a casual thing you're
doing.
the rest of us that can look at
ourselves. What we do when we look at
ourselves is we focus on the things we
need to fix.
For most women, putting on makeup is not
additive. It's not a creative
expression. It's covering something up
that you don't like. It's changing
something that you think is wrong. That
action, that intention behind it is
self-rejection.
It is self-criticism. It is self-hatred.
And for so many men, if it's not about
your appearance, it's about where you
are in life, what you've provided, how
much you've made, what car you drive,
where you stand in your career, what
you've built, what you haven't, the
mistakes that you've made. So you stand
in judgment.
And
what is so
groundbreaking
about the act of being where you are in
life, even with all that judgment or
that weight or that shame or that regret
or whatever it may be that you carry
into the bathroom with you based on your
life, when you raise your hand to
high-five the human being you see in the
mirror, your brain has neural
association with that physical action.
The physical action in and of itself is
a positive trigger for every human being
on the planet. Even if you are in a
culture where people do not high-five
each other, you have seen sports teams
do it.
You have seen viral videos with it. Your
brain knows exactly what a high five is.
Just like everybody's brain knows
exactly what this is.
You don't even have to say a word
because all of the positive programming
is already hardwired into your basil
ganglia and the physical action alone
triggers it. You know, you've never
high-fived somebody and thought, "I hate
you. You suck. You've blown your life. I
hope you lose the game. [__] off."
You've never ever done it. It is
neurologically impossible
to stand in front of the mirror and
actually think something negative as
your hand is reaching the mirror because
your brain's not programmed to do that.
So when you high-five somebody, what are
what does the high five communicate?
Well done. Acceptance. Congratulations.
You did it. You can do it. Let's do it.
Um yeah, well done. It's collaboration.
It's partnership. It's union.
Yeah.
If somebody's going through a challenge,
it's shake it off. You got this. Keep
going.
It is so many things, but it's all in
belief and celebration and being seen.
All of which are your fundamental
emotional needs.
And so, the thing that's super exciting
about this is that we're taking
programming that is already stored in
your mind, body, and spirit, and we're
just going to aim it right back at you.
[clears throat]
And the layers upon layers upon layers
of psychological proof of research of
all kinds of evidence for why this works
goes so deep. It's extraordinary. So for
example, the physical action of
high-fiving your brain has already
always given you a drip of dopamine.
That's why you will immediately feel a
boost in your mood. It's why a lot of
people laugh. The other thing that
happens is um you are also tapping into
wiring in your nervous system that's
celebratory. So when you cross a finish
line for example or when your favorite
team scores what do you instinctively
do?
Celebrate.
Yeah. You raise your arms. Shout
surprise. You raise your arms. When you
say hello you raise your arms. When you
go to high five somebody you raise your
arms. So even on your lowest morning
when you go to raise your arm to
high-five yourself.
nervous system taps into that
celebratory energy that we all so
desperately need in life. The other
thing that happens that I love about
this is you don't need to say a word
because for many people who feel
extraordinarily stuck and beaten down
and full of shame or regret, you
wouldn't believe any positive mantras
anyway because you've got so much
evidence for why you're a screw-up, why
things aren't working. But when you go
to raise your hand,
the gesture does all the communicating.
And it also taps into behavioral
activation therapy,
which says at its most simple form, act
like the person you want to become.
That's not fake it till you make it. By
the way, this is intentional.
Intentionally act like the person you
want to become. Because when you
intentionally act like the person you
want to become, your brain sees you
taking those actions. So, your brain
starts to change the way it relates to
you. When your brain sees you
high-fiving yourself in the mirror, it
starts to go, "Oh, wait a minute.
Steven loves himself.
Steven's cheering for himself. We don't
beat Steven up."
Do you see a difference when you between
doing it with yourself and doing it with
someone else?
Oh, it's night. Well, it's night and day
in that you've been cheering for
everybody else your whole life.
And when somebody else high-fives you,
it feels amazing because you're getting
affirmed as a human being.
It's connection as well.
It's connection.
Yeah.
But I believe you can create that same
connection with yourself.
And what's happened for me is profound.
I mean, I, you know, used to look in the
mirror and on default pick myself apart.
It was never enough. Didn't matter how
many millions of dollars I made. It was
never enough. I was no no. And I realize
now like so many entrepreneurs, I had
married achievement with being worthy of
love. That as long as I was achieving
something, then I was worthy of love.
And that's also why we all tend to chase
achievement because the second that you
get the first million in the bank, okay,
now I got to do more. Because if you're
not doing something, then who are you?
And in practicing the high- five habit
for now more than a year, in researching
it for more than a year, in having
hundreds of thousands of people go
through this thing that we call the
high- five challenge, we've released it
to the public now for 34 days. We've had
136,000 people complete it from 91
countries.
Not a single person, because we're
tracking all the data on it, has said it
didn't work. Not a single person. We
have people writing to us about the
breakthroughs they're having with
depression, with anxiety, with suicidal
ideiation, with self-worth, with senses
of failure because it's the physical
action and the programming that exists
within you that go to work against the
patterns that are making you feel so
dark and stuck. And that's why this is
powerful. And so after a year of doing
this, what's amazing is I don't even see
my face anymore.
I just see a person that I love, you
know, being a parent, it's pretty
extraordinary.
Um, you have this experience when when
you become a parent or even a pet owner,
right? Where you love this thing so much
even when the dog poops on the ground,
you're angry, but you don't stop loving
the dog.
When your kids screw up, you might be
annoyed or regret what they did, but you
don't stop loving them. But somehow we
never figured out how to do that for
ourselves.
That when we screw up, we stop loving
ourselves and we stand in judgment
instead. And I think that's why life is
hard. I think that's why people don't
feel inspired and motivated.
You want to fix imposttor syndrome and
people pleasing? Learn how to stand in
front of the mirror.
Give yourself a high five. Demonstrate
that you like yourself. Demonstrate that
you accept yourself. Because if you like
yourself,
you don't go out in the world and look
for other people to like you because you
don't need it.
It's wonderful if they do. But the
fantastic thing is is if you actually
like yourself, if you just accept where
you are, you stop judging yourself, you
accept yourself with some compassion.
What's extraordinarily powerful about
it, Stephen, is that when you go out in
the world, if somebody else disrespects
you, it doesn't change the fact that you
respect yourself. If somebody else
doesn't like you or love you, yeah, it
stings. It sucks, but it doesn't change
the fact that you like or love yourself.
That's your first foundation, right?
That's your first foundation.
And this high- five habit of standing in
partnership with yourself, demonstrating
through a physical action that you see
yourself, you support yourself, you got
you you got your own back. You like
yourself. You know you deserve to be
treated this way. It changes how you
show up in life.
Quick one. As you probably know by now,
I'm trying to make my life a little bit
more sustainable. And I consider myself
to be on a bit of a sustainability
journey in the same way that I'm on a
health journey. And it's a privilege to
be able to share that with all of you.
And you you all know if you've listened
to the last podcast that I traded in my
Range Rover Sport in for an electric
bicycle, which is now my only vehicle.
And next year hopefully I'll have my
electric car 2 if Tesla hurry up with a
Cybert truck. And that's where my energy
comes into my life and my sort of
sustainability journey. It makes your
life if you are on that sustainability
journey 10 times easier. This is one of
their, if you can't see this, I'm
holding it in my hand. If you're
listening on Spotify or Apple, this is
one of their renewable energy products.
If you're watching on YouTube, you
you'll you'll see this. This is called
the Harvey. It's this very clever little
device that allows the Zappy and the
Eddie, which I've talked about before on
this podcast, to be installed into your
home without hard wiring or without
batteries or without those um god-awful
transformers that a lot of people have
in their house. It's basically a tiny
device that's going to save you both
time and money. And for someone like me
who doesn't have loads of time on our
hands, it's a real lifesaver. If you're
looking to make a conscious switch and
you need a quick fix that's going to
save you a load of time, then head over
to myenergy.com to see this product and
many, many more.
A lot of self-help advice tends to
advise like looking in the mirror
and just like saying nice [__] to
yourself like I am strong and capable
and I will be a millionaire and then
like crack on with you.
If that worked, we'd all be
millionaires. Yeah, [laughter]
but so that doesn't work cuz there a lot
of people wait. Isn't that how you made
your million?
Didn't you just stand in front of a
mirror and say, "I'm a millionaire. I
got to be a millionaire. I got to be a
millionaire."
And then I went back to bed. There's a
lot of like that narrative in society
and this is like
it's [__]
It's inter with the manifestation piece
which is from what I've a lot of the
fluffy stuff that I read is like you
just got to think about it. In fact, I
had this argument with this girl one day
in New York where she was like, "Steve,
all you got to do is think about it and
it'll happen." like, "So, you don't
believe there's any work involved?"
Nope. Just think about it. And I was
like, I don't
That sounds like somebody with a trust
fund. [laughter]
And the the the analogy I often give is
like, if I just did the satnav in my car
and didn't put the the key in and press
the accelerator, I would just be in my
garage all day. Like, I understand the
importance of knowing where you're
going, which is the satnav, but I also
have to drive or else we're not going to
move.
Yeah. So, um, couple things. Positive
mantras don't work. And they don't work
because people pick positive mantras
that they don't believe.
So if you are
in a studio apartment eating rice and
beans, barely able to pay your bills,
standing in front of a mirror and
saying, "I'm a millionaire. I'm going to
be a millionaire someday." What happens
based on research is your brain's like,
"Uh, actually, have you seen where you
live?" Like have you seen that you've
quit every job that you've had? Have you
seen and heard your negative selft talk?
I don't I don't think this is going to
like your brain's like uh-uh your brain
has a great [__] detector.
And so the mistake people make is they
pick a mantra that is the exact opposite
of the way they treat themselves.
Is it like so the way that I've come to
maybe even in the last two months is my
brain actually needs evidence.
Yes.
Right. And yes, like so,
and you know what evidence it wants? It
wants [__] action,
right?
Oh, yeah. Prove it to me. Behavioral
activation therapy. Act like the person
you say you want to be, and then maybe
I'll believe you.
Yeah.
Now, should you still interrupt the
beatdown?
Absolutely.
Absolutely you should. What I'm saying
is you got to stop
beating the hell out of yourself.
But you can't jump immediately to and
it's gonna all magically disappear and
I'm going to love my body after beating
myself up and hating myself for 20
years. It's not going to happen that
fast. So, you know, if you want to do
mantras, do a more pathetic mantra. you
know, do something that's like a little
bit like more achievable, like, you
know, instead of uh, you know, I love my
body after trashing your body for 20
years, say, I deserve to be healthy.
Even if you hate your body, anybody and
any brain can get behind, "Yeah, you do.
That's right. I'm glad you're waking up.
You do deserve to be healthy.
Now, now prove it. Let's take some
actions that show you that." So, no,
mantras don't work if you're picking a
mantra you don't believe. And if you're
picking a mantra that is the opposite of
the way you treat yourself and the
actions you take. So that's number one.
Number two, manifesting. Everybody has
been sold a bill of goods about
manifesting.
If you make a vision board with your uh
house on the ocean or you at the stock
exchange ringing the bell and that's all
that you have on it,
science says that that vision board will
become a source of profound
discouragement
because over time as you sit there and
stare at your dreamhouse or you ringing
the bell at NASDAQ and nothing in your
life changes,
you start to feel further and further
and further away from what you want,
which makes you feel further and further
discouraged, which means you're less and
less motivated to even begin working on
it. Like the hardest part for everybody
is to start. And the reason why is not
only the patterns of procrastination and
anxiety and stuff that you get trapped
in, but it's also because your goals
feel so far away that you don't believe
that just starting is going to even chip
away at it. And so number one, because
it sounds like I just contradicted
myself. Yes, you need to have something
like a beach house or the NASDAQ bell or
the business you're starting or the love
affair of your life or the family you've
always envisioned or the health that
you've always dreamt about. Absolutely.
Swing for the fences. What do you want
it to look like 10 years from now? But
when it comes to manifesting based on
science, I want you to think as
manifesting as a bridge.
Manifesting is a bridge that's made of
bricks between you
and the thing that you dream about. And
what you do when you manifest is you
don't manifest where the bridge is
going. You manifest the bricks.
So a great example is a marathon. So
let's say that you've never run a day in
your life, but your bucket list is to
complete the London Marathon. Yes, you
can put on your vision board a
photograph of a runner crossing the
London Marathon. You can even put the
dream that you have in terms of the the
number that you want the time to be.
Okay? But you better put a runner in the
rain up there. You better put an alarm
clock that says 4:30 in the morning cuz
that's what time you're going to have to
get up in order to get your training
runs in. You better put a runner that's
gripping their leg like this when they
get a muscle cramp. You better put up uh
you know a vision of you at mile 13 and
your earbuds run out and you still got
two more miles to go.
Visualization
is the bricks. And so what I want you to
do when you visualize is instead of
visualizing, ah the marathon, I did it.
Oh, it's amazing. And then you open up,
you're like, okay, and I still have not
even bought a pair of sneakers. That's
not happening. But that was a fun little
exercise. No, what you do is you
literally visualize, walk into the store
and get sneakers.
Call your friend who runs and ask for
advice. Oh my god, that's me on my first
training run. I've only gone 30 seconds
and I'm out of breath. Oh, there I am
running three miles in the rain and I
feel proud of myself because I've
actually gone out in the rain. Oh, there
I am saying uh no to my friends. I can't
go out tonight cuz I didn't get my run
in, but I'm going to go on my big run
alone. That like you visualize the
annoying, irritating, amazing things.
I'm sure people look at you all the time
with your extraordinary success,
Stephen, and are like, "How'd you do it?
How'd you do it? And
like, do you know how many things I
missed out on? Do you know how many like
how like the amount of work that nobody
wants to do because they're not thinking
about it is extraordinary. That's the
bridge.
Anybody is capable of achieving
anything. I actually believe that
because I think human beings are
designed to change. You're capable of
breaking any pattern. You're capable of
getting control of your health. You're
capable of launching a business. You're
capable of making millions of dollars.
You're capable of healing your trauma,
of finding love, of doing absolutely
anything that you put your mind to as
long as you are willing to do the work
for it. And as long as you give up your
timeline,
because I do believe that people who put
in the work get rewarded,
but you just might not get rewarded when
you think you're going to be. And it
might not be the reward that you thought
you were going to get.
Is that the case in your life?
It's always the case. And that's why I
always have big dreams because I have
learned time and time and time and time
again, especially in entrepreneurial
ventures that you put this huge flag out
there, you write the business plan, you
set the goals, and then you put your
[__] head down, and you put in the
work, and you ride the wave, and you
have the disappointments, and you spend
the late nights, and you have the
heartbreak, and the heartache, and then
things change and then you think, "Fuck,
this didn't work out and I got betrayed
and why didn't they recognize me and
damn it, I've worked hard and now I got
to start all over." And you have all of
that. But if you keep going and you keep
going,
eventually you will look up one day and
be like, "Holy [__] this
is exactly
what I was meant to do and what I was
meant to discover." Yeah, my business
plan said I was supposed to go over here
and I ended up over here because this is
what I was supposed to do. But without
this business plan, I never would have
gotten started. The business plan was
but a dot on the map of my life
connecting me to where I meant to go.
You know, I think one of the most
extraordinary things that has happened
to me in this past year, especially now
that I have this real partnership with
myself
where I have a
level of trust
that through my attitude, through my
actions, through a sense of faith that
it's going to turn out.
that even when things are really hard, I
still believe deep in my core that
through my attitude and my actions, it's
going to be okay. That I have within me
the power to ride the ups and downs and
to come out on the other side of it. And
you know, I think that we've all had the
experience, Stephen, of being able to
look backwards and say, "Whoa, you know,
I wouldn't ever wish the experience that
I had back in fourth grade on anybody.
But without that experience,
I would not be able to help the amount
of people that I help. I would not be
able to understand trauma as a lived
experience and inside and out and at a
layer that's so deep because it is an
experience that I had in my life.
Without 25 years of struggling with
anxiety, without having two kids that
have struggled with anxiety, I would not
know what I know about anxiety and be
able to help people, including my own
children. uh I would not without having
made mistakes uh with my kids and their
anxiety be able to tell parents do not
do this because I did this and it made
my kids' anxiety worse and I didn't even
know.
And so I can see, you know, I can see
how everything from, you know, working
as a public defender to being a legal
commentator for CNN to the number of
stages that I've been on to the number
of people that I've helped. I can see
how all of that comes together
to help me do what I need to do in this
moment. And I think one of the most
powerful things that you can cultivate
when you cultivate partnership with
yourself is being able every single day
to have a level of trust in your life,
in the magic of things, in yourself to
know that this moment right now is also
a dot on the map of your life. And 5,
10, 20 years from now, you will look
back on this moment
and you will know exactly why this
happened. And why it happened is it was
preparing you for something. It was
giving you a skill or an experience or
some wisdom or a relationship that
you're going to need for something
extraordinary that's coming. And when
you believe that, it gives you the
strength to face absolutely anything.
When you look back on the person you are
now
and the tremendous wisdom that you've
just demonstrated just speaking to me
just then do you recognize the male that
was couldn't get out of bed was feeling
depressed couldn't find you know
described herself as you as you did as
being lazy do you recognize that person
and what's at the very essence in the
engine room that drove that change was
it
passion Was it finding your calling?
Um,
cuz I know you weren't this. You
couldn't have been this person.
Dude, it's also been 31 years. I mean,
come on. I've had I've I've like
basically been changing for as long as
you've been alive for crying out loud.
So, and also human beings are designed
to grow,
but not everybody [clears throat] seems
to because you have
because they don't understand being
stuck.
Yeah. Interesting.
See,
being stuck is one of the most universal
feelings of the human experience, and
nobody understands what it is.
What is it?
Oh, it's amazing when you hear this.
It's like,
so remember how we've talked about how
uh the human beings have this crazy
amount of natural intelligence wired
into us. And inside your body, we've
talked about one of the signals,
anxiety. Anxiety is a signal that means
pay attention. That's why you go into
fight or flight. You're in an alert
mode. Okay, that's all it is. It's a
signal, an alarm system. And your body
has a sophisticated
uh system of signals and alarms. And
they are all tied to fundamental needs.
Anxiety is tied to your fundamental need
for safety. That's why it's a signal.
Let's talk about your most important
fundamental needs. Let's go right back
to psychology 101. Maslaw's hierarchy of
needs. Uh you need food or else you die.
So when you need food, what is the
signal that your body sends you?
Hunger.
When you need water, what is the signal?
When you need um uh air, yeah, you
catching your breath. When you need
rest, what do you feel?
Right.
When you need connection, what do you
feel?
Lonely.
Human beings are designed to grow. When
you stop growing, what do you feel?
Stuck.
Yeah. [clears throat] I was going to say
stagnant, but I guess stuck is Yeah.
Or stagnant.
Yeah.
Or still
trapped, I guess, is Yeah.
Yeah. Feeling stuck is a signal that
you've stopped growing. That's it.
And when most people feel stuck, since
they don't understand that it's tied to
a fundamental need for growth,
we believe it's an existential crisis
and we blow up our lives.
For most human beings, what actually
will get you feeling like you're not
stuck is having something in the future
that you're looking forward to
or taking a class where you're learning
something or changing a routine so that
you try a new class at the gym. Learning
anything gets you back in touch with a
fundamental need. It makes you start to
feel like things are moving. And from
that place of feeling a little bit more
empowered, you'll be able to make better
decisions about what big things need to
change in your life.
And is that a you would also describe
that as a moment where your life has
like an absence of purpose. I think
about I think about various examples
Olympians that come back from the
Olympics and they they like 80% chance
of depression after they've you know you
know and then I think about people who
have yeah lost purpose in their lives
for whatever reason been fired from
their jobs or whatever or people that
are in jobs that are you know absent of
purpose completely that feeling of being
stuck and and then you said we talked
also about the importance of goals and
ambitions going forward when humans
don't have that that forward ambition or
that thing to look forward forward to in
the future and their current situation
lacks purpose. They become very um
psychologically
disorientated would be the way I'd
describe it.
Mhm. Um I act I have a different take on
purpose.
Um I think everybody's purpose is
exactly the same.
What is that?
I think your purpose
is to share your true self, to be fully
seen.
And for the Olympian, when you are
training and you're in that arena,
that is an experience of being seen.
And for most people that are lacking
purpose, they feel profoundly invisible.
And being seen
fundamentally comes back to whether or
not you even see yourself.
And when you start to feel empowered and
you start to see yourself and meet you
where you are,
what happens is every day that you're
able to stand with yourself, to accept
where you are, to give yourself the
compassion to give yourself the support
and the love and the respect and the
worthiness that you deserve. You're
going to go out into the world and share
more of yourself. that Olympic athlete
is sharing more of themselves. And so I
think our purpose in life is to come
back home to ourselves, to reconnect
with ourselves, and to empower
ourselves, to go back out into the world
and share our stories and share our
experiences and share our full selves
with the rest of the world.
from a prehistoric standpoint, let's
say, you know, because I always try and
like check things against the the
caveman of my, you know, my ancestral
beings. The the idea of being seen when
I was, you know, my ancestors 10,000
years ago, what kind of role does that
play in
from a survival perspective, let's say?
Well, I I mean, I'm freestyling here, so
Okay,
my suspicion is if you were not within
your mom's eye view,
your ass was going to get eaten. M
and so I think that uh you know if you
wandered off as a kid you were in
danger.
If [clears throat] you weren't hunting
with the pack you were in danger. And so
being seen means safety.
And [clears throat] that's why when you
look at psychological safety there are
three fundamental needs. The need to be
seen,
the need to be heard
and the need to be celebrated
for the unique person that you are.
Those are your three fundamental
emotional needs when it comes to feeling
safe and whole as a human being. And
most people's experience by the time
they are done with childhood is they
feel invisible. They feel like nobody
gets them and they feel completely
disconnected and unloved or not
celebrated.
Makes a ton of sense. Yeah.
So I did okay on that answer.
Yeah. I know it's a really really
remarkable reframing. We have a new
tradition on the diary of a CEO which is
in the diary, the famous diary of a CEO,
the previous guest always writes a
question for the next guest that's
coming
and they don't know who they are.
Okay.
And these guests, they're so diverse.
It's always so fascinating and they
never know who they're writing it for,
which is also interesting. The previous
guest wrote,
"What is the one regret you have,
if you have any at all?"
Um,
it's a it's a tricky question because
I'm one of these people that doesn't
want to go back and change anything.
I think everybody is according to the
science. We we had a mad sit here from
Google. He talked about the eraser test
and he said even people that have gone
through profound trauma when asked the
question if they would erase the trauma
99 plus% said no because of the domino
effect you don't know. You know, it's an
interesting one.
Yeah. Um, you know, like any behavior
that hurt somebody else,
you know, [clears throat] anything that
I did, whether it was lied or cheating
or, you know, just being an [__]
when I was just trying to survive that
unintentionally hurt somebody else.
Yeah. I wish that that wasn't part of my
story. M
um but
but [laughter]
you know I wouldn't I wouldn't
understand
at a profound level that really
well-meaning good people do really
shitty things when they feel shitty
about themselves. M
and you know if I hadn't done shitty
things when I felt shitty about myself
I wouldn't fully believe that
and you might do that again I guess had
you not done it once.
Yeah. Yeah. Or twice or three times or
four times. Like first you got to wake
up you know
and then there's all the things that I
did that I don't realize hurt somebody
else. M
but you know I know in my heart that I
was still a good person. I was just in a
really bad place which is you know why
you do bad things. Your relationship
with yourself is the foundation for
everything in life. And if you believe
you're a bad person you will tend to do
bad things. And the opposite is also
true. If you believe that you are a good
person who is worthy of good things, you
tend to do good things.
Unbelievably true.
My last question for you is one that I
tend to always ask people I meet that I
find uh to be incredibly wise
and very good at helping others. I mean,
you help hundreds of millions of people
um combined. Um, which is,
do you still struggle with all of the
[__] you talk about?
Oh my god.
Like,
yes.
That's why I'm so [__] relatable. I
do not have this stuff figured out. I am
shouldertoshoulder with everybody.
Um whether it's issues going on with one
of my kids, issues going on with one of
me, you know, with look, you know, just
the other night, uh I mean, I'm this is
what happened. I
self-published the audio book.
Okay.
And um which is amazing because I'm a
smart [__] I own my rights
and you should own No, this one I did a
joint venture on the publishing, but I
own all of the audio.
Amazing. And um because the 5-second
rule is self-published and it's the
number one selling self-published audio
book in the history of audio books.
The book is self-published as well. Oh,
smart.
And um which is why I need to get into
NFTTS because my I don't like it when
somebody else has control. I as an
artist want to own what I do. As a
businesswoman, nothing pisses me off
more than getting into a dumb deal. And
then I resent the people that I'm in the
deal with because I didn't negotiate
properly. And if you believe in what
you're doing, you better own your work.
You better understand the longtail
payoff of your work because nobody will
market your work better than you. And
you will be profoundly pissed off when
somebody else is making their money a
100 years from now. And for every author
that's that's listening, make sure you
look at Amazon because the uh relatives
of uh what's his face who wrote the
seven habits of highly effective
whatever, they're the ones collecting
checks on that cuz that book is still
hitting.
So you want to be like Mariah Carey. She
laughs all the way to the bank whenever
Christmas rolls around because of that
song.
And so, you know, I uh self-publish the
audio book. I have a tremendous
partnership with Audible um where we
create a lot of original content for
them behind their payw wall and I
self-published this book and we
destroyed it in sales the month of
October. The number one selling audio
book period hands down of any book that
was published period. AP reported it.
Everybody reported it. And then the New
York Times comes out um in November and
they uh rank the top 10 audio books of
the month of October
and they deliberately
left me off. And when that happened, I
punched the wall.
I drank a gin martini. I lit up a joint.
I called a couple friends and bitched.
And I immediately got triggered because
I went right back to the experience of
being a ninth grader on the tennis team
and having the seniors throw a party and
I was the only ninth grader who wasn't
involved. And so it triggered a very old
pattern that I thought I had [__]
gotten rid of, which is I'm an outsider.
Nobody likes me. I'm always having to
sneak in. Why am I never invited? Why am
I not part of the cool kids? Why am I
not f? You know, like it's that old
stupid ass story that got triggered. And
so, of course, this [__] happens. It
happens all the time. And I just happen
to talk about it because I don't like
feeling these things. And I find that
just trying to shove it down makes the
next time it happens get even bigger.
And so I share this stuff because I
think holding it in is what's creating a
lot of anxiety and regret and upset and
stuckness for people. We are all so the
same.
And the more that you know I kind of
share the ups and downs I think the more
people listen to the things that are
working and try them out and tweak them
for their own life. And look, if I can
save anybody the heartache and the
headaches it caused myself, that's a
life well-lived.
You know, if I can laugh at myself along
the way, if I can punch a wall and drink
a gin martini and then share with you
like, okay, this and then get out
because how I got out of that cuz I
could have been in that cycle, the old
mill would have been there for a month.
Everybody's out to get me. I never get
recognized. Why even bother? It doesn't
matter. And
it allows me to share in real time that
I feel all the [__] but I don't like to
stay there. And this is not toxic
positivity. It is important when you're
disappointed to allow yourself to feel
disappointed. It is important when you
lose something to give yourself the
grace to grieve for as long as you need
to. It is important to have a good cry,
to have a good scream, to draw. It's
important to feel the highs and the
lows. You're meant to feel it all,
but you can shorten
the length of time you stay down. And
what always helps me, it's something
that, you know, I I developed when the
high- five the the 5-second rule launch
was coming off the rails is I just kept
saying what I what I've said a couple
times during this. I I say to myself, I
refuse to believe
that if I'm a good person and that if
I'm working hard,
I refuse to believe that this doesn't
work out.
I refuse to believe that I'm not going
to be okay. Like, I know that this
moment's going to pass and I know that I
will look back on this moment 5 years
from now and I'll see exactly what I was
meant to learn. And what I was meant to
learn, I already know is that I have got
to once and for all stop looking for
validation in old institutions.
If I truly want to be an artist on my
own terms, don't even pay attention to
that [__] because it doesn't matter in
the world that we're living in now. It
doesn't matter if you really want to
make impact because the person that's
struggling is the person that you want
to reach, not the person that's deciding
who gets on some stupid list that's
printed in a paper.
and redirecting your focus to what
actually matters. And the fact that you
believe in your heart that you got the
mindset, you got the work ethic, you got
the ability to figure this [__] out and
to keep going. And that eventually, if
you do, what's meant for you is going to
find you. You will be rewarded for all
this in the way that you're meant to be
rewarded.
That's amazing. It's an amazing feeling
because you can pick yourself up no
matter what happens.
Well, thank God you do share it because,
you know, [clears throat]
you're a very special human being and
there's very few in the world that have
the the the genius of the skill stack
the way it's kind of how I see it that
you have where they're able to go
through things in life, analyze them,
understand them from a psychological or
scientific perspective, from an sort of
intrinsic internal perspective and then
be a a masterful ortor in sharing that
in a relatable honest way. that helps
others to change their lives and find uh
find the peace they're looking for, find
the the outcomes they're searching for.
There's very few that can do that with
such genius. So,
that's a that's a beautiful compliment
and thank you for saying that. I really
appreciate it and I can hear it
for [clears throat] the first time in my
life. I can hear it.
And you've also
given me this like extraordinary insight
that I just got.
Um, [snorts]
so you asked me in the beginning
kind of what is it that that created all
of this insight or this drive to figure
it out? And I think I just figured it
out. You You just [__] did it. I just
figured it out. I spent so long
being disregulated,
having a nervous system that was
constantly
on edge, like what it felt like to be
me,
any moment in my life, whether I was
sitting in a classroom or I was sitting
at that law firm bait stamping or I'm
sitting uh as a young mom with
postpartum depression or I'm sitting in
yet another job I don't like is it felt
like being in a car
at a stoplight that had a green signal
and the emergency brake was on and the
gas was floored and I was going nowhere.
Like just the engine revved and the
sense that I needed to go but not being
able to go.
And
when I finally started to get control of
my own thinking,
when I finally started to understand
anxiety and how to quiet it in my mind
and then how to quiet it in my body,
when I finally got serious about
understanding trauma and healing it in
my nervous system first
through EMDR, through therapy, through
guided did MDMA sessions,
I finally had the experience
of being in my body and being safe and
being okay.
And I hadn't had that in a really long
time. And um
I'm so
aware of when I'm not in my body now.
I'm so aware of when my nervous system
starts to go on edge that my tolerance
for staying there is zero because I live
for far too long feeling on edge,
anxious, disregulated, self-loathing
that when I dip into that space and
everybody you dip into that space once a
day if not like I used to live there
and so when I start to dip into that
disregulated, anxious, on edge, intense
space.
It's like, get this out of my body. We
got to get back into my new default,
which is grounded, centered, in control
of what I'm thinking, what I'm going to
do next. And it's a fluid situation. But
you just gave me the insight as to why
it's so quick for me now because I've
made a commitment to myself that after
spending 30 years that way, 40 almost
that I don't want to live another year
that way, another week that way, another
full day that way. Now, do I have things
that happen in my life that are
tough that that put me into a mode where
I'm anxious and on edge? And of course,
do I disassociate when I get really
awful? Of course. But I now have the
tools
to bring myself back into my body to
give myself the encouragement, the
assurance, the support that I need so
that I can face whatever is happening
and know that I'm not only going to be
okay, I'm actually going to be awesome
eventually.
That's beautiful. And um yeah, I got a
little bit emotional there, too. I um
I'd also assert that you figured that
out. Um and you're also helping a lot of
other people figure that out in
themselves which is a remarkable I mean
it's the highest service I think any one
human being could do for society is to
do what you're doing at the moment. And
yeah I you know if only there were more
forces in the world like you. I really I
was thinking as you were speaking I was
thinking this this woman really is a
force in the world and I I'm like
nothing can stop you. I really believe
that. I was thinking nothing is you've
got too much too strong too much too
much intrinsic drive that's coming from
a lot of the sort of traumas and
experiences you've described. Nothing
can stop you. No inclusion on any list
is going to stop you. Probably only add
to the to the the coal fire inside of
you. [laughter] So that's uh everything
better just get out the way. Thank you
so much for the time, the honesty, the
openness, the inspiration for many a
year. I've seen you going way back in to
the viral video days on Facebook where
you'd come up all the time in my feed
and I'd say who's this person and what's
this thing she's talking about jumping
out of bed and I was like [__] you know
then I was trying, you know, trying it
myself and it was working for me. So
it's such a huge honor and that's a word
I use sparingly but in this case it's
perfectly adequate to to sit here with
you and to um spend some time with you
and it's time I won't forget. So thank
you.
Thank you. [music]
Heat. Heat. N.
[music]
Hey. Hey. Hey.